---
title: Python
subtitle: Programming language
description: Phyton programming language
layout: note
---

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-generate-toc again -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Concepts](#concepts)
    - [Object Oriented related concepts](#object-oriented-related-concepts)
    - [Environment isolation](#environment-isolation)
        - [Same database engine in all the environments](#same-database-engine-in-all-the-environments)
        - [Usage of Virtual Environments](#usage-of-virtual-environments)
            - [virtualenv](#virtualenv)
            - [virtualenvwrapper](#virtualenvwrapper)
        - [OS isolation](#os-isolation)
    - [Project structure](#project-structure)
- [Database](#database)
    - [Peewee](#peewee)
- [References](#references)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

# Concepts

* _Style guide_ for python code PEP-8 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>
  * Tools to help in formatting Python code:
	* [pep8](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pep8) checks your Python code against some of the style conventions.
	* [autopep8](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/autopep8) automatically formats Python code to conform to the PEP 8 style guide.
  
* Relative imports makes code more portable. 

  * _absolut import_ `from core.views import absolute` <---  To import from outside the app
  * _explicit relative_ `from .models import CommandModel` <--- To import in current app 

* Avoid Using `Import *` as it can lead to undesirable results. You can't really know which packages you are using.

## Object Oriented related concepts

> The rule of thumb is, don't introduce a new attribute outside of the __init__ method, otherwise you've given the caller an object that isn't fully initialized.
> -- <cite>https://jeffknupp.com/blog/2014/06/18/improve-your-python-python-classes-and-object-oriented-programming/</cite>
{: cite="https://jeffknupp.com/blog/2014/06/18/improve-your-python-python-classes-and-object-oriented-programming/"}

* Why you need _self_ as the first positional argument of a method

> In Python, this: `my_object.method("foo")` is syntactic sugar, which the interpreter translates behind the scenes into: `MyClass.method(my_object, "foo")` which, as you can see, does indeed have two arguments - it's just that the first one is implicit, from the point of view of the caller. 
> This is because most methods do some work with the object they're called on, so there needs to be some way for that object to be referred to inside the method. By convention, this first argument is called self inside the method definition.
{: cite="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/23944657/typeerror-method-takes-1-positional-argument-but-2-were-given"}

## Environment isolation

### Same database engine in all the environments

The same database engine (e.g. PostgreSQL, sqlite, MySQL), should be used in all the different environments of a project.

It is a common bad practice to have a lightweight database in the _development_ environment and something more powerful in _production_, all of them should use the same engine to avoid the different ways each one handle the data.

This way it is possible to:

+ examine the _production environment_ data locally.
+ avoid the different _types_ and _constraints_ each database engine has. (e.g. sqlite does not support foreign key constraint, while PostgreSQL does )

__pip__ and __virtualenv__ are used to have isolated  environments for each projects, so they can handle their own dependencies and versions.

### Usage of Virtual Environments ###

Handle dependencies and app versions for each project.

#### virtualenv ####

General workflow for project isolation:

+ Create a project dir
+ Create a virtual environment for the project outside its directory structure
  + _virtualenvwrapper_ uses the variable WORKON_HOME to specify the location of new virtual environments. The default value is __$HOME/.virtualenvs__
+ Then each time you work on the project you have two alternatives:

+ _Manually activate the virtual environment_ for the project, so it handles all the commands instead of executing the current Operating System ones. `source ~/.virtualenvs/my_project/bin/activate`
  + _Configure a virtualenvwrapper_ and then just select your environment with a command like: `workon my_project`

Common workflow to create a new _virtualenv_:

+ Create the virtual environment (preferable in a directory outside your project)
+ activate the project to work on

```
$ mkdir my_project;
### Create the virtual environment (optionally select python version)
$ virtualenv -p python3.5 ~/.virtualenvs/my_project
### Activate it
$ source ~/.virtualenvs/my_project/bin/activate #the following commands will use the packages installed in this virtual environment
### Your Bash prompt will change to show you are in a virtual environment
(virtualenv)$ ... #work 
(virtualenv)$ deactivate #finish work
$
```

+ virtualenv <https://virtualenv.pypa.io>

#### virtualenvwrapper ####

Virtualenvwrapper makes it easier to perform _virtualenv_ tasks. It is build upon the following concepts:

+  Projects
  + The source code that needs a special virtual environment specified in a _requirements_ file.
  + The base directory for projects is specified in __PROJECT_HOME__.
+ A Virtualenv directory
  + All the _virtualenvs_ for each project will be contained here in subdirectories.
  + Specified in the variable __WORKON_HOME__, by default will be: _$HOME/.virtualenvs_

`mkvirtualenv` provides the same options as `virtualenv` plus a few options. It creates by default the _virtualenv_ environment in `~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>` and then activates it.

`Usage: mkvirtualenv [-a project_path] [-i package] [-r requirements_file] [virtualenv options] env_name`

Common workflow to create a new _virtualenv_ with _virtualenvwrapper_:

+ Create the virtual environment (by default in __$WORKON_HOME__)
+ list the available _environments_ and activate the project to work on
+ Go to the project directory `cdvirtualenv`
+ deactivate the environment when finished working

``` bash
$ mkvirtualenv myenvname
New python executable in /home/marcanuy/.virtualenvs/myenvname/bin/python
Installing setuptools, pip, wheel...done.
(myenvname)$ workon #the previous created env will appear listed, along the other envs
myenvname
(myenvname)$ cdvirtualenv myenvname #changes to the associated project directory
(myenvname)/opt/development/myproject$ cdsitepackages
(myenvname)~/.virtualenvs/myenvname/lib/python3.5/site-packages$ cdvirtualenv
(myenvname)/opt/development/myproject$ deactivate #finish work
/opt/development/myproject$
```

To create a new environment having a requirements file and a specific python version: `mkvirtualenv -r requirements/local.txt -p /usr/bin/python3.5 myprojectname`

+ virtualenvwrapper <https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io>

### OS isolation ###

If there is more than one computer in the development process, there would be probably different Operating Systems and software versions involved that can lead to inconsistencies in source code. There are two applications that play nice together:

+ [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com) creates reproducible development environments. In addition to being useful in setting up _developers environments_, it makes easier to configure __development__, __staging__ and __production__ environment.

+ [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org) is a virtualization product, makes it easy to have the same OS that the Vagrant file is built for.

## Project structure

* <http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/writing/structure/>
* <https://jeffknupp.com/blog/2013/08/16/open-sourcing-a-python-project-the-right-way/>

# Database #

## Peewee ##

A small ORM that supports postgresql, mysql and sqlite. Can be used with models like Django.

+ <http://docs.peewee-orm.com/>
+ <https://github.com/coleifer/peewee>

References
==========

+ [Phyton 3 Official Documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/)
+ <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/>

*[ORM]: Object Relational Mapping
